README.md, before:

# Welcome #

 This is the Cascading.HBase module.

 It provides support for reading/writing data to/from an HBase
 cluster when bound to a Cascading data processing flow.

 Cascading is a feature rich API for defining and executing complex,
 scale-free, and fault tolerant data processing workflows on a Hadoop
 cluster. It can be found at the following location:

   http://www.cascading.org/

 HBase is the Hadoop database. Its an open-source, distributed,
 column-oriented store modeled after the Google paper on Bigtable.

   http://hbase.apache.org/

# History #

 This version has roots from the original Cascading.HBase effort by Chris
 Wensel, and then modified by Kurt Harriger to add the dynamic scheme, putting
 tuple fields into HBase columns, and vice versa.  Twitter's Maple project also
 has roots from the original Cascading.HBase project, but is an update to
 Cascading 2.0.  Maple lacks the dynamic scheme, so this project basically
 combines everything before it and updates to Cascading 2.2.x and HBase 0.94.x.
 It also adds support for lingual.

# Building #

 This version could be built by using gradle:
     
     > gradle build

If the tests are failing on your machine, do a `umask 022` before starting the
build.

# Using #

## In cascading applications ##

  The cascading-hbase.jar file should be added to the "lib" directory of your
  Hadoop application jar file along with all Cascading dependencies.

  The jar files are deployed on [conjars](http://conjars.org/cascading/cascading-hbase)

  See the HBaseDynamicTest and HBaseStaticTest unit tests for sample code on
  using the HBase taps, schemes and helpers in your Cascading application.

## In lingual ##

This project also creates a lingual compliant provider jar, which can be used to
talk to HBase via standard SQL. Below can you find a possible session with
lingual and HBase.

    # the hbase provider can only be used with the hadoop platform
    > export LINGUAL_PLATFORM=hadoop
    
    # tell lingual, where the namenode, the jobtracker and the hbase zk quorum are
    > export LINGUAL_CONFIG=fs.default.name=hdfs://master.local:9000,mapred.job.tracker=master.local:9001,hbase.zookeeper.quorum=hadoop1.local


First we intall the provider, by dowlaoding it from conjars.

    > lingual catalog --provider --add cascading:cascading-hbase:2.2.0-+:provider

Next we are creating a new schema called `working` to work with.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --add

Now we add the `hbase` format from the `hbase` provider to the schema. We tell
the provider, which column family, we want to work with. In this case, the
family is called `cf`. Please note that there is a strict one-to-one mapping
from HBase column families to lingual tables. If you want to access multiple
column families in HBase from lingual, you can map them to different tables.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --format hbase --add  --properties=family=cf --provider hbase

We register a new stereotype called `hbtest` with four fields: `ROWKEY`, `A`,
`B` and `C` all of type `string`. These are the fields that will be used by the
HBaseTap. The first field is always used as the rowkey in the table. All
subsequent fields are used as qualifiers in a given column family (see above).

    > lingual catalog --schema working --stereotype hbtest -add --columns ROWKEY,A,B,C --types string,string,string,string

Now we add the `hbase` protocol to the schema.
   
    > lingual catalog --schema working --protocol hbase --add --provider hbase

Finally we create a lingua table called `hb` with the hbase provider. The table
is called `cascading` in the HBase instance, so we use that as the identifier.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --table hb --stereotype hbtest -add "cascading" --protocol hbase --format hbase --provider hbase

Now we can talk to the HBase table from lingual:

    > lingual shell
    (lingual)> select * from "working"."hb";
    +---------+----+----+----+
    | ROWKEY  | A  | B  | C  |
    +---------+----+----+----+
    +---------+----+----+----+

    (lingual)> insert into "working"."hb" values ('42', 'one', 'two', 'three');
    +-----------+
    | ROWCOUNT  |
    +-----------+
    | 1         |
    +-----------+

    (lingual)> select * from "working"."hb";
    +---------+------+------+--------+
    | ROWKEY  |  A   |  B   |   C    |
    +---------+------+------+--------+
    | 42      | one  | two  | three  |
    +---------+------+------+--------+


# License #

  Copyright (c) 2009 Concurrent, Inc.

  This work has been released into the public domain by the copyright holder,
  unless otherwise noted. This applies worldwide.

  In case this is not legally possible:
  The copyright holder grants any entity the right
  to use this work for any purpose, without any
  conditions, unless such conditions are required by law.

  The code contains contributions from the following authors:
  - Andre Kelpe
  - Brad Anderson
  - Chris K Wensel
  - Dave White
  - Dru Jensen
  - Jean-Daniel Cryans
  - JingYu Huang
  - Ken MacInnis
  - Kurt Harriger
  - matan
  - Ryan Rawson
  - Soren Macbet

Commit message:

explained type conversion in the lingual provider

README.md, after:

# Welcome #

 This is the Cascading.HBase module.

 It provides support for reading/writing data to/from an HBase
 cluster when bound to a Cascading data processing flow.

 Cascading is a feature rich API for defining and executing complex,
 scale-free, and fault tolerant data processing workflows on a Hadoop
 cluster. It can be found at the following location:

   http://www.cascading.org/

 HBase is the Hadoop database. Its an open-source, distributed,
 column-oriented store modeled after the Google paper on Bigtable.

   http://hbase.apache.org/

# History #

 This version has roots from the original Cascading.HBase effort by Chris
 Wensel, and then modified by Kurt Harriger to add the dynamic scheme, putting
 tuple fields into HBase columns, and vice versa.  Twitter's Maple project also
 has roots from the original Cascading.HBase project, but is an update to
 Cascading 2.0.  Maple lacks the dynamic scheme, so this project basically
 combines everything before it and updates to Cascading 2.2.x and HBase 0.94.x.
 It also adds support for lingual.

# Building #

 This version could be built by using gradle:
     
     > gradle build

If the tests are failing on your machine, do a `umask 022` before starting the
build.

# Using #

## In cascading applications ##

  The cascading-hbase.jar file should be added to the "lib" directory of your
  Hadoop application jar file along with all Cascading dependencies.

  The jar files are deployed on [conjars](http://conjars.org/cascading/cascading-hbase)

  See the HBaseDynamicTest and HBaseStaticTest unit tests for sample code on
  using the HBase taps, schemes and helpers in your Cascading application.

## In lingual ##

This project also creates a lingual compliant provider jar, which can be used to
talk to HBase via standard SQL. Below can you find a possible session with
lingual and HBase.

    # the hbase provider can only be used with the hadoop platform
    > export LINGUAL_PLATFORM=hadoop
    
    # tell lingual, where the namenode, the jobtracker and the hbase zk quorum are
    > export LINGUAL_CONFIG=fs.default.name=hdfs://master.local:9000,mapred.job.tracker=master.local:9001,hbase.zookeeper.quorum=hadoop1.local


First we intall the provider, by dowlaoding it from conjars.

    > lingual catalog --provider --add cascading:cascading-hbase:2.2.0-+:provider

Next we are creating a new schema called `working` to work with.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --add

Now we add the `hbase` format from the `hbase` provider to the schema. We tell
the provider, which column family, we want to work with. In this case, the
family is called `cf`. Please note that there is a strict one-to-one mapping
from HBase column families to lingual tables. If you want to access multiple
column families in HBase from lingual, you can map them to different tables.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --format hbase --add  --properties=family=cf --provider hbase

We register a new stereotype called `hbtest` with four fields: `ROWKEY`, `A`,
`B` and `C` all of type `string`. These are the fields that will be used by the
HBaseTap. The first field is always used as the rowkey in the table. All
subsequent fields are used as qualifiers in a given column family (see above).

    > lingual catalog --schema working --stereotype hbtest -add --columns ROWKEY,A,B,C --types string,string,string,string

Now we add the `hbase` protocol to the schema.
   
    > lingual catalog --schema working --protocol hbase --add --provider hbase

Finally we create a lingua table called `hb` with the hbase provider. The table
is called `cascading` in the HBase instance, so we use that as the identifier.

    > lingual catalog --schema working --table hb --stereotype hbtest -add "cascading" --protocol hbase --format hbase --provider hbase

Now we can talk to the HBase table from lingual:

    > lingual shell
    (lingual)> select * from "working"."hb";
    +---------+----+----+----+
    | ROWKEY  | A  | B  | C  |
    +---------+----+----+----+
    +---------+----+----+----+

    (lingual)> insert into "working"."hb" values ('42', 'one', 'two', 'three');
    +-----------+
    | ROWCOUNT  |
    +-----------+
    | 1         |
    +-----------+

    (lingual)> select * from "working"."hb";
    +---------+------+------+--------+
    | ROWKEY  |  A   |  B   |   C    |
    +---------+------+------+--------+
    | 42      | one  | two  | three  |
    +---------+------+------+--------+

### Types, Lingual, and HBase

The lingual provider takes a pragmatic approach to types, when it reads and
writes to HBase. Since HBase has no type enforcement and there is no reliable
way to guess the types, the provider converts every field to a `String` before
storing it. The type conversion is done viia the types on the Fields instance.
If the type is a `CoercibleType`, the coerce method is called.  When the data is
read back, the is converted to its canonical representation, before it handed
back to linugal. This makes sure that data written from lingual can be read back
in lingual.

Other systems interacting with the same table need to take his behaviour into
account.

# License #

  Copyright (c) 2009 Concurrent, Inc.

  This work has been released into the public domain by the copyright holder,
  unless otherwise noted. This applies worldwide.

  In case this is not legally possible:
  The copyright holder grants any entity the right
  to use this work for any purpose, without any
  conditions, unless such conditions are required by law.

  The code contains contributions from the following authors:
  - Andre Kelpe
  - Brad Anderson
  - Chris K Wensel
  - Dave White
  - Dru Jensen
  - Jean-Daniel Cryans
  - JingYu Huang
  - Ken MacInnis
  - Kurt Harriger
  - matan
  - Ryan Rawson
  - Soren Macbet
